README.md, before:


Monocular Visual Odometry
=======================================

**Content:** A **Monocular Visual Odometry** (VO) with initialization, tracking, local map, and bundle adjustment.

**Video demo**: http://feiyuchen.com/wp-content/uploads/vo_with_opti.mp4   
  On the left: **White line** is the estimated camera trajectory, whose **red dots** are keyframes. **Green line** is ground truth. **Red map points** are triangulated by last keyframe.  
  On the right: **Green** are keypoints. **Red** are inlier matches with map points.  

![](https://github.com/felixchenfy/Monocular-Visual-Odometry-Data/raw/master/result/vo_with_opti.gif)

**Project purpose:** This is a practice after I read the [Slambook](htcdtps://github.com/gaoxiang12/slambook). This will also be my final project of the course EESC-432 Advanced Computer Vision, so this repo will be kept on updating until and completed by **March 15th**. 

**Data files:** Please download from here: https://github.com/felixchenfy/Monocular-Visual-Odometry-Data

**Directory:**
<!-- TOC -->

- [Monocular Visual Odometry](#monocular-visual-odometry)
- [1. Algorithm](#1-algorithm)
  - [1.1. Initialization](#11-initialization)
  - [1.2. Tracking](#12-tracking)
  - [1.4. Local Map](#14-local-map)
  - [1.3. Bundle Adjustment](#13-bundle-adjustment)
  - [1.5. Other details](#15-other-details)
- [2. File Structure](#2-file-structure)
  - [2.1. Folders](#21-folders)
  - [2.2. Functions](#22-functions)
- [3. Dependencies](#3-dependencies)
- [4. How to Run](#4-how-to-run)
- [5. Results](#5-results)
- [6. Reference](#6-reference)
- [7. To Do](#7-to-do)

<!-- /TOC -->


# 1. Algorithm
This VO is achieved by the following procedures/algorithms:

## 1.1. Initialization

**When to initialize**:  
Given a video, set the 1st frame(image) as reference, and do feature matching with the 2nd frame. If the average displacement in pixel between inlier matched keypoints exceeds a threshold, the initialization will be started. Otherwise, skip to the 3rd, 4th, etc frames until the criteria satisfies at the K_th frame. Then estimate the relative camera pose between the 1st and K_th frame.

**Estimate relative camera pose**:  
Compute the **Essential Matrix** (E) and **Homography Matrix** (H) between the two frames. Compute their **Symmetric Transfer Error** by method in [ORB-SLAM paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.00956) and choose the better one (i.e., choose H if H/(E+H)>0.45). **Decompose E or H** into the relative pose of rotation (R) and translation (t). By using OpenCV, E gives 1 result, and H gives 2 results, satisfying the criteria that points are in front of camera. For E, only single result to choose; For H, choose the one that makes the image plane and world-points plane more parallel.

**Recover scale**:  
Scale the translation t to be either: (1) Features points have average depth of 1m. Or (2) make it same scale as the corresponding groundth data so that I can draw and compare.

**Keyframe and local map**:  
Insert both 1st and K_th frame as **keyframe**. **Triangulate** their inlier matched keypoints to obtain the points' world positions. These points are called **map points** and are pushed to **local map**.

## 1.2. Tracking

Keep on estimating the next camera pose. First, find map points that are in the camera view. Do feature matching to find 2d-3d correspondance between 3d map points and 2d image keypoints. Estimate camera pose by RANSAC and PnP.

## 1.4. Local Map

**Insert keyframe:** If the relative pose between current frame and previous keyframe is large enough with a translation or rotation larger than the threshold, insert current frame as a keyframe.   
Do feature matching between current and previous keyframe. Get inliers by epipoloar constraint. If a inlier keypoint hasn't been triangulated before, then triangulate it and push it to local map. All map points have a unique ID.

**Clean up local map:** Remove map points that are: (1) not in current view, (2) whose view_angle is larger than threshold, (3) rarely be matched as inlier point. (See Slambook Chapter 9.4.)

**Graph/Connections between map points and frames:**  
Graphs are built at two stages of the algorithm:
1) After PnP, based on the 3d-2d correspondances, I update the connectionts between map points and current keypoints.
2) During triangulation, I also update the 2d-3d correspondance between current keypoints and triangulated mappoints, by either a direct link or going through previous keypoints that have been triangulated.


## 1.3. Bundle Adjustment

Since I've built the graph in the previous step, I know what the 3d-2d point correspondances are in all frames.

Apply optimization to the previous N frames, where the cost function is the sum of reprojection error of each 3d-2d point pair. By computing the deriviate wrt (1) points 3d pos and (2) camera poses, we can solve the optimization problem using Gauss-Newton Method and its variants. These are done by **g2o** and its built-in datatypes of `VertexSBAPointXYZ`, `VertexSE3Expmap`, and `EdgeProjectXYZ2UV`. See Slambook Chapter 4 and Chapter 7.8.2 for more details.

TODO: Currently, I only do optimization on the camera poses. There is a bug of huge error when I simultaneously optimize the map points, which might due to the wrong weight between mappoints and camera poses. DEBUG later. 

Besides, it shows that the best result achieves when only single frame is optimimzed (instead of multiple frames), which is kind of weired. (I don't think it's a bug of the program, since Performance of optimizing on 5 or 15 frames is about the same.) TODO: Figure out why this happens.

## 1.5. Other details

**Image features**:  
Extract ORB keypoints and features. Then, a simple grid sampling on keypoint's pixel pos is applied to retain uniform keypoints. See [config/config.yaml](config/config.yaml) for the parameters.
(Notes: The ORB-SLAM paper says that they do grid sampling in all pyramids, and extract more keypoints if somewhere has few points.)


**Feature matching**:  
Two methods are implemented, where good match is:  
(1) Feature's distance is smaller than threshold, described in Slambook.  
(2) Ratio of smallest and second smallest distance is smaller than threshold, proposed in Prof. Lowe's 2004 SIFT paper.  
The first one is adopted, which is easier to tune the parameters to generate fewer error matches.  
(Notes: ORB-SLAM paper is doing guided search for finding matches)

# 2. File Structure
## 2.1. Folders
* [include/](include/): c++ header files.
* [src/](src/): c++ definitions.
* [src_main/](src_main/): Main script to run VO.
* [test/](test/): Test scripts for c++ functions.

Main scripts and classes for VO are in [include/my_slam/](include/my_slam/). I referenced the [Slambook Chapter 9](https://github.com/gaoxiang12/slambook/tree/master/project/0.4) for setting this up.

## 2.2. Functions
Functions are declared in [include/](include/). Some of its folders contain a README. See the tree structure for overview:

```
include
├── my_basics
│   ├── basics.h
│   ├── config.h
│   ├── eigen_funcs.h
│   ├── io.h
│   ├── opencv_funcs.h
│   └── README.md
├── my_display
│   ├── pcl_display.h
│   └── pcl_display_lib.h
├── my_geometry
│   ├── camera.h
│   ├── common_include.h
│   ├── epipolar_geometry.h
│   ├── feature_match.h
│   └── motion_estimation.h
├── my_optimization
│   └── g2o_ba.h
└── my_slam
    ├── common_include.h
    ├── commons.h
    ├── frame.h
    ├── map.h
    ├── mappoint.h
    ├── README.md
    └── vo.h

```
# 3. Dependencies
Require: OpenCV, Eigen, Sophus, g2o.  
See details below:

**(1) OpenCV 4.0**   
Tutorial for install OpenCV 4.0: [link](https://www.pyimagesearch.com/2018/08/15/how-to-install-opencv-4-on-ubuntu/).

You may need a version newer than 3.4.5, because I used this function:  
`filterHomographyDecompByVisibleRefpoints`, which appears in OpenCV 3.4.5. 

**(2) Eigen 3**  
It's about matrix arithmetic. See its [official page]( http://eigen.tuxfamily.org/index.php?title=Main_Page). Install by:  
> $ sudo apt-get install libeigen3-dev 

(Note: Eigen only has header files. No ".so" or ".a".) 


**(3) Sophus**  
It's based on Eigen, and contains data type of SE3/SO3/se3/so3.

Download here: https://github.com/strasdat/Sophus. Do cmake and make. Since I failed to make install it, I manually moved “/Sophus/sophus” to “/usr/include/sophus”, and moved “libSophus.so” to “usr/lib”. Then, in my CMakeLists.txt, I do `set (THIRD_PARTY_LIBS libSophus.so )`.

**(4) g2o**  
Download here: https://github.com/RainerKuemmerle/g2o. Checkout to the last version in year 2017. Do cmake, make, make install.

If the csparse library is not found during cmake, please install the following package:
> $ sudo apt-get install libsuitesparse

# 4. How to Run  
> $ mkdir build && mkdir lib && mkdir bin   
> $ cd build && cmake .. && make && cd ..  

Then, set up things in [config/config.yaml](config/config.yaml), and run:  
> $ bin/run_vo config/config.yaml  

# 5. Results

I tested the current implementation on [TUM](https://vision.in.tum.de/data/datasets/rgbd-dataset/download) fr1_desk and fr1_xyz dataset, but both performances are **bad**. I guess one of the **cause** is that high quality keypoints are too few, so the feature matching returns few matches. The **solution** I guess is to use the ORB-SLAM's method for extracting enough uniformly destributed keypoints, and doing guided matching based on the estimated camera motion. 

However, my program does work on this [New Tsukuba Stereo Database](http://cvlab.cs.tsukuba.ac.jp/), whose images and scenes are synthetic and have abundant high quality keypoints. The result shows that the VO could roughly estimate camera motion.  
See the gif **at the beginning of this README**.

I also put two video links here which I recorded on my computer:  
[1. VO video, with optimization on single frame](
https://github.com/felixchenfy/Monocular-Visual-Odometry-Data/blob/master/result/vo_with_opti.mp4)  
[2. VO video, no optimization](https://github.com/felixchenfy/Monocular-Visual-Odometry-Data/blob/master/result/vo_no_opti.mp4)  
With bundle adjustment (only on camera pose, and single frame), the result improves, as you can see that the shape of the estimated trajectory is very closer to the truth trajectory.

TODO: Debug BA, why I failed to optimize map points at the same time.

# 6. Reference

**(1) Slambook**:    
I read this Dr. Xiang Gao's [Slambook](https://github.com/gaoxiang12/slambook) before writing code. The book provides both vSLAM theory as well as easy-to-read code examples in every chapter. 

The framework of my program is based on Chapter 9 of Slambook, which is a RGB-D visual odometry project. Classes declared in [include/my_slam/](include/my_slam/) are based on this Chapter.

These files are mainly copied or built on top of the Slambook's code:
* CMakeLists.txt
* [include/my_basics/config.h](include/my_basics/config.h).
*  [include/my_optimization/g2o_ba.h](include/my_optimization/g2o_ba.h).

I also borrowed other codes from the slambook. But since they are small pieces and lines, I didn't list them here.

In short, the Slambook provides huge help for me and my this project.


**(2) Matlab VO tutorial**:  
[This](https://www.mathworks.com/help/vision/examples/monocular-visual-odometry.html?searchHighlight=visual%20odometry&s_tid=doc_srchtitle) is a matlab tutorial of monocular visual odometry. Since Slambook doesn't write a lot about monocular VO, I resorted to this Matlab tutorial for solution. It helped me a lot for getting clear the whole workflow.

The dataset I used is also the same as this Matlab tutorial, which is the [New Tsukuba Stereo Database](http://cvlab.cs.tsukuba.ac.jp/).

**(3) ORB-SLAM paper**

I borrowed its code of **the criteria for choosing Essential or Homography** for VO initialization. See the functions of `checkEssentialScore` and `checkHomographyScore` in [motion_estimation.h](include/my_geometry/motion_estimation.h).



# 7. To Do

**Bugs**    
* In release mode, the program throws an error:
  > *** stack smashing detected ***: <unknown> terminated  
  Please run in debug mode.

**Improvements**  
* Fix bug in bundle adjustment.

Commit message:

Test opti with (1) 5 frames (2) 1 frame + points. Both are better than no opti.

README.md, after:


Monocular Visual Odometry
=======================================

**Content:** A **Monocular Visual Odometry** (VO) with initialization, tracking, local map, and bundle adjustment.

**Video demo**: http://feiyuchen.com/wp-content/uploads/vo_with_opti.mp4   
  On the left: **White line** is the estimated camera trajectory, whose **red dots** are keyframes. **Green line** is ground truth. **Red map points** are triangulated by last keyframe.  
  On the right: **Green** are keypoints. **Red** are inlier matches with map points.  

![](https://github.com/felixchenfy/Monocular-Visual-Odometry-Data/raw/master/result/vo_with_opti.gif)

**Project purpose:** This is a practice after I read the [Slambook](htcdtps://github.com/gaoxiang12/slambook). This will also be my final project of the course EESC-432 Advanced Computer Vision, so this repo will be kept on updating until and completed by **March 15th**. 

**Data files:** Please download from here: https://github.com/felixchenfy/Monocular-Visual-Odometry-Data

**Directory:**
<!-- TOC -->

- [Monocular Visual Odometry](#monocular-visual-odometry)
- [1. Algorithm](#1-algorithm)
  - [1.1. Initialization](#11-initialization)
  - [1.2. Tracking](#12-tracking)
  - [1.4. Local Map](#14-local-map)
  - [1.3. Bundle Adjustment](#13-bundle-adjustment)
  - [1.5. Other details](#15-other-details)
- [2. File Structure](#2-file-structure)
  - [2.1. Folders](#21-folders)
  - [2.2. Functions](#22-functions)
- [3. Dependencies](#3-dependencies)
- [4. How to Run](#4-how-to-run)
- [5. Results](#5-results)
- [6. Reference](#6-reference)
- [7. To Do](#7-to-do)

<!-- /TOC -->


# 1. Algorithm
This VO is achieved by the following procedures/algorithms:

## 1.1. Initialization

**Estimate relative camera pose**:  
Given a video, set the 1st frame(image) as reference, and do feature matching with the 2nd frame. Compute the **Essential Matrix** (E) and **Homography Matrix** (H) between the two frames. Compute their **Symmetric Transfer Error** by method in [ORB-SLAM paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.00956) and choose the better one (i.e., choose H if H/(E+H)>0.45). **Decompose E or H** into the relative pose of rotation (R) and translation (t). By using OpenCV, E gives 1 result, and H gives 2 results, satisfying the criteria that points are in front of camera. For E, only single result to choose; For H, choose the one that makes the image plane and world-points plane more parallel.

**Recover scale**:  
Scale the translation t to be either: (1) Features points have average depth of 1m. Or (2) make it same scale as the corresponding groundth data so that I can draw and compare.

**Keyframe and local map**:  
Insert both 1st and K_th frame as **keyframe**. **Triangulate** their inlier matched keypoints to obtain the points' world positions. These points are called **map points** and are pushed to **local map**.

**Check Triangulation Result**  
If the median triangulation angle is smaller than threshold, I will abandon this 2nd frame, and repeat the above process on frame 3, 4, etc. If at frame K, the triangulation angle is large than threshold, the initialization is completed.

## 1.2. Tracking

Keep on estimating the next camera pose. First, find map points that are in the camera view. Do feature matching to find 2d-3d correspondance between 3d map points and 2d image keypoints. Estimate camera pose by RANSAC and PnP.

## 1.4. Local Map

**Insert keyframe:** If the relative pose between current frame and previous keyframe is large enough with a translation or rotation larger than the threshold, insert current frame as a keyframe.   
Do feature matching between current and previous keyframe. Get inliers by epipoloar constraint. If a inlier keypoint hasn't been triangulated before, then triangulate it and push it to local map. All map points have a unique ID.

**Clean up local map:** Remove map points that are: (1) not in current view, (2) whose view_angle is larger than threshold, (3) rarely be matched as inlier point. (See Slambook Chapter 9.4.)

**Graph/Connections between map points and frames:**  
Graphs are built at two stages of the algorithm:
1) After PnP, based on the 3d-2d correspondances, I update the connectionts between map points and current keypoints.
2) During triangulation, I also update the 2d-3d correspondance between current keypoints and triangulated mappoints, by either a direct link or going through previous keypoints that have been triangulated.


## 1.3. Bundle Adjustment

Since I've built the graph in the previous step, I know what the 3d-2d point correspondances are in all frames.

Apply optimization to the previous N frames, where the cost function is the sum of reprojection error of each 3d-2d point pair. By computing the deriviate wrt (1) points 3d pos and (2) camera poses, we can solve the optimization problem using Gauss-Newton Method and its variants. These are done by **g2o** and its built-in datatypes of `VertexSBAPointXYZ`, `VertexSE3Expmap`, and `EdgeProjectXYZ2UV`. See Slambook Chapter 4 and Chapter 7.8.2 for more details.

TODO: ADD RESULTS.

## 1.5. Other details

**Image features**:  
Extract ORB keypoints and features. Then, a simple grid sampling on keypoint's pixel pos is applied to retain uniform keypoints. See [config/config.yaml](config/config.yaml) for the parameters.
(Notes: The ORB-SLAM paper says that they do grid sampling in all pyramids, and extract more keypoints if somewhere has few points.)


**Feature matching**:  
Two methods are implemented, where good match is:  
(1) Feature's distance is smaller than threshold, described in Slambook.  
(2) Ratio of smallest and second smallest distance is smaller than threshold, proposed in Prof. Lowe's 2004 SIFT paper.  
The first one is adopted, which is easier to tune the parameters to generate fewer error matches.  
(Notes: ORB-SLAM paper is doing guided search for finding matches)

# 2. File Structure
## 2.1. Folders
* [include/](include/): c++ header files.
* [src/](src/): c++ definitions.
* [src_main/](src_main/): Main script to run VO.
* [test/](test/): Test scripts for c++ functions.

Main scripts and classes for VO are in [include/my_slam/](include/my_slam/). I referenced the [Slambook Chapter 9](https://github.com/gaoxiang12/slambook/tree/master/project/0.4) for setting this up.

## 2.2. Functions
Functions are declared in [include/](include/). Some of its folders contain a README. See the tree structure for overview:

```
include
├── my_basics
│   ├── basics.h
│   ├── config.h
│   ├── eigen_funcs.h
│   ├── io.h
│   ├── opencv_funcs.h
│   └── README.md
├── my_display
│   ├── pcl_display.h
│   └── pcl_display_lib.h
├── my_geometry
│   ├── camera.h
│   ├── common_include.h
│   ├── epipolar_geometry.h
│   ├── feature_match.h
│   └── motion_estimation.h
├── my_optimization
│   └── g2o_ba.h
└── my_slam
    ├── common_include.h
    ├── commons.h
    ├── frame.h
    ├── map.h
    ├── mappoint.h
    ├── README.md
    └── vo.h

```
# 3. Dependencies
Require: OpenCV, Eigen, Sophus, g2o.  
See details below:

**(1) OpenCV 4.0**   
Tutorial for install OpenCV 4.0: [link](https://www.pyimagesearch.com/2018/08/15/how-to-install-opencv-4-on-ubuntu/).

You may need a version newer than 3.4.5, because I used this function:  
`filterHomographyDecompByVisibleRefpoints`, which appears in OpenCV 3.4.5. 

**(2) Eigen 3**  
It's about matrix arithmetic. See its [official page]( http://eigen.tuxfamily.org/index.php?title=Main_Page). Install by:  
> $ sudo apt-get install libeigen3-dev 

(Note: Eigen only has header files. No ".so" or ".a".) 


**(3) Sophus**  
It's based on Eigen, and contains data type of SE3/SO3/se3/so3.

Download here: https://github.com/strasdat/Sophus. Do cmake and make. Since I failed to make install it, I manually moved “/Sophus/sophus” to “/usr/include/sophus”, and moved “libSophus.so” to “usr/lib”. Then, in my CMakeLists.txt, I do `set (THIRD_PARTY_LIBS libSophus.so )`.

**(4) g2o**  
Download here: https://github.com/RainerKuemmerle/g2o. Checkout to the last version in year 2017. Do cmake, make, make install.

If the csparse library is not found during cmake, please install the following package:
> $ sudo apt-get install libsuitesparse

# 4. How to Run  
> $ mkdir build && mkdir lib && mkdir bin   
> $ cd build && cmake .. && make && cd ..  

Then, set up things in [config/config.yaml](config/config.yaml), and run:  
> $ bin/run_vo config/config.yaml  

# 5. Results

I tested the current implementation on [TUM](https://vision.in.tum.de/data/datasets/rgbd-dataset/download) fr1_desk and fr1_xyz dataset, but both performances are **bad**. I guess one of the **cause** is that high quality keypoints are too few, so the feature matching returns few matches. The **solution** I guess is to use the ORB-SLAM's method for extracting enough uniformly destributed keypoints, and doing guided matching based on the estimated camera motion. 

However, my program does work on this [New Tsukuba Stereo Database](http://cvlab.cs.tsukuba.ac.jp/), whose images and scenes are synthetic and have abundant high quality keypoints. The result shows that the VO could roughly estimate camera motion.  
See the gif **at the beginning of this README**.

I also put two video links here which I recorded on my computer:  
[1. VO video, with optimization on single frame](
https://github.com/felixchenfy/Monocular-Visual-Odometry-Data/blob/master/result/vo_with_opti.mp4)  
[2. VO video, no optimization](https://github.com/felixchenfy/Monocular-Visual-Odometry-Data/blob/master/result/vo_no_opti.mp4)  
With bundle adjustment (Only on camera pose, and single frame. TODO: ADD A GIF OF OPTIMIZING MULTIPLE FRAMES.), the result improves, as you can see that the shape of the estimated trajectory is very closer to the truth trajectory.


# 6. Reference

**(1) Slambook**:    
I read this Dr. Xiang Gao's [Slambook](https://github.com/gaoxiang12/slambook) before writing code. The book provides both vSLAM theory as well as easy-to-read code examples in every chapter. 

The framework of my program is based on Chapter 9 of Slambook, which is a RGB-D visual odometry project. Classes declared in [include/my_slam/](include/my_slam/) are based on this Chapter.

These files are mainly copied or built on top of the Slambook's code:
* CMakeLists.txt
* [include/my_basics/config.h](include/my_basics/config.h).
*  [include/my_optimization/g2o_ba.h](include/my_optimization/g2o_ba.h).

I also borrowed other codes from the slambook. But since they are small pieces and lines, I didn't list them here.

In short, the Slambook provides huge help for me and my this project.


**(2) Matlab VO tutorial**:  
[This](https://www.mathworks.com/help/vision/examples/monocular-visual-odometry.html?searchHighlight=visual%20odometry&s_tid=doc_srchtitle) is a matlab tutorial of monocular visual odometry. Since Slambook doesn't write a lot about monocular VO, I resorted to this Matlab tutorial for solution. It helped me a lot for getting clear the whole workflow.

The dataset I used is also the same as this Matlab tutorial, which is the [New Tsukuba Stereo Database](http://cvlab.cs.tsukuba.ac.jp/).

**(3) ORB-SLAM paper**

I borrowed its code of **the criteria for choosing Essential or Homography** for VO initialization. See the functions of `checkEssentialScore` and `checkHomographyScore` in [motion_estimation.h](include/my_geometry/motion_estimation.h).



# 7. To Do

**Bugs**    
* In release mode, the program throws an error:
  > *** stack smashing detected ***: <unknown> terminated  
  Please run in debug mode.

**Improvements**  
* Fix bug in bundle adjustment.
